.\"
.\" $Header: gated.man,v 1.1.109.8 92/03/25 16:02:34 ash Exp $
.\"
.TH gated 1M "Requires Optional \s-1ARPA\s0 Services Software"
.SH NAME
gated \- gateway routing daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.CI gated
[
.C \-c
] [
.C \-n
] [
.CR \-t\fR<trace_options>
] [
.CR \-f <config_file>
] [trace_file]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.CI Gated
is a routing daemon that handles
the RIP, BGP, EGP, and HELLO routing protocols.  The
.CI gated
process can be configured to perform all routing protocols or any
combination of the four.
.ul 2
Currently, the BGP protocol is available, but is not supported by
Hewlett-Packard.
.PP
The command-line options are:
.IP -c
Specifies that the configuration file will be parsed for syntax errors
and then gated will exit, if there were no errors, gated will leave a
dump file in /usr/tmp/gated_dump.  Gated does not need to be run as
the super user to use the -c option, but may not be able to read the
kernel's routing table unless it is run as super user.  The -c option
implies -tierk.
.IP -n
Specifies that gated will not modify the kernel's
routing table.  This is used for testing gated
configurations with actual routing data.
.IP -t
Specifies trace flags to be enabled on startup.
If no flags are specified, "ier" is assumed.  No
spaces are allowed between this option and it's
arguments.
.sp
This option must be used to trace events that
take place before the config file is parsed,
such as determining the interface
configuration and reading routes from the
kernel.
.sp
The trace flags are:
.RS
.IP A
all
.PD 0
.IP i
internal
.IP e
external
.IP k
kernel
.IP r
route
.IP m
mark
.IP t
nostamp
.IP P
protocol
.IP u
update
.IP R
RIP
.IP H
hello
.IP C
icmp
.IP p
EGP
.IP B
BGP
.PD
.PP
The trace options are explained in greater detail in
.CR gated-config (4).
.RE
.IP -f
Use an alternate config file.
By default,
.CI gated
uses
.IC /etc/gated.conf .
.PP
If on the command line a trace file is specified, or no trace
flags are specified, gated detaches from the terminal
and runs in the background.  If trace flags are
specified without specifying a trace file, gated
assumes that tracing is desired to the console and
remains in the foreground.
.SH "SIGNAL PROCESSING"
.PP
.CI Gated
catches a the following signals and does special processing.
.PD 1.5v
.IP SIGHUP: 16
Re-read configuration.
.sp
A SIGHUP causes gated to reread the configuration
file.  Gated first performs a clean-up of all
allocated policy structures.  All BGP and EGP peers
are flagged for deletion and the configuration file is
re-parsed. 
.sp
If the re-parse is successful, any BGP and EGP peers
that are no longer in the configuration are shut down,
and new peers are started.  Gated attempts to
determine if changes to existing peers require a
shutdown and restart.
.sp
It should also be possible to enable/disable any
protocol without restarting gated.
.IP SIGINT:
Snap-shot of current state.
.sp
The current state of all gated tasks, timers,
protocols and tables are written to
/usr/tmp/gated_dump.
.sp
On systems supporting fork(), this is done by
forking a subprocess to dump the table information so
as not to impact gated's routing functions.  On
systems where memory management does not support
copy-on-write, this will cause the gated address space
to be duplicated; this may be cause a noticeable impact
on the system.  On system not supporting fork(), the
main process immediately processes the dump, which may
impact gated's routing functions.
.IP SIGTERM:
Graceful shutdown.
.sp
On receipt of a SIGTERM, gated attempts a graceful
shutdown.  All tasks and protocols are asked to
shutdown.  Most will terminate immediately, the
exception being EGP peers which wait for confirmation.
It may be necessary to repeat the SIGTERM once or
twice if it this process takes too long.
.sp
All exterior routes (BGP and EGP) are removed from the
kernel's routing table on receipt of a SIGTERM.
Interior routes (all others) remain.  To terminate
gated with the exterior routes intact, use SIGKILL or
SIGQUIT (which causes a core dump).
.IP SIGUSR1:
Toggle tracing.
.sp
On receipt of a SIGUSR1, gated will close the trace
file.  A subsequent SIGUSR1 will cause it to be
reopened.  This will allow the file to be moved
regularly.
.sp
It is not possible to use SIGUSR1 if a trace file has
not been specified, or tracing is being performed to
the console.
.PD
.SH AUTHORS
Mark Fedor, PSI
.br
Jeffrey C Honig, Cornell University
.SH SEE ALSO
gated-config(4),
arp(1m),
ifconfig(1m),
netstat(1m)
.PP
.PD 0
.IP RFC\ 891 16
DCN Local-Network Protocols (HELLO)
.IP RFC\ 904
Exterior Gateway Protocol Formal Specification
.IP RFC\ 1058
Routing Information Protocol
.IP RFC\ 1163
A Border Gateway Protocol (BGP)
.IP RFC\ 1164
Application of the Border Gateway Protocol in the Internet

