.\" @(#)makedd man:	2.1	[88/05/23  11:09:07]
.TH MAKEDD 1M
.ad b
.SH NAME
.nf
makedd - make delivery directories for delivering bits to
         SSIT
.fi
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \fImakedd\fR
[ \fIsource_file_prefix\fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The shell script, \fImakedd\fR, was written to perform much of the work required to
provide bits to SSIT.
It is assumed that you are familiar with \fIThe SSIT Delivery Process
Document\fR.
If not, please read it before running \fImakedd\fR.
.sp
The \fImakedd\fR script will
.RS
.TP
-
create the delivery directory structures, including:
.RS
.TP
-
the /<GENERIC PRODUCT NAME>, \fI/RELEASE\fR and \fI/products\fR
directories
.TP
-
all of the needed subdirectories under each of these directories
.RE
.TP
-
create the fileset lists
.TP
-
create each fileset's \fIrevlist\fR
.TP
-
correctly modify the \fIdir\fR variable in the \fIship.rel\fR file and
create the \fIship.data\fR file
.TP
-
set the permission bits, owner and group of each automatically created
file and directory
.TP
-
put the products' files into the delivery directory structure, and
.RS
.TP
-
set the permission bits, owner and group of each file (as determined by you -
see the \fBFILES\fR section for how to do this)
.TP
-
format (as per the \fIman\fR(1) command) and/or \fIcompress\fR(1) manual pages
prior to storing them in the delivery directory structure
.TP
-
\fIstrip\fR(1) executable files and \fIunifdef\fR(1) header files
.RE
.RE
.P
\fBNOTE\fR: you must be root when running \fImakedd\fR, because it
creates directories under /.
.P
You must modify the \fImakedd\fR script directly to give values to several
variables prior to running \fImakedd\fR.
Those variables and their descriptions are as follows.
.TP
.B DESC_FILE
The name of the file that contains the descriptions of files to be delivered.
(The contents of this file are described in the \fBFILES\fR section.)
If you leave this undefined, \fImakedd\fR will prompt you for the name of the
descriptions file.
.TP
.B GENERIC_PRODUCT_NAME
The name given the GENERIC PRODUCT NAME directory (see \fIThe SSIT Delivery
Process Document\fR).
The value of \fBGENERIC_PRODUCT_NAME\fR must always be defined.
.TP
.B PROD_DIRS
The names of directories that are owned by any product in
$\fBDESC_FILE\fR.
(A directory owned by a product would not exist on a customer's
system if that product did not exist on the system.)
\fBNOTE\fR: each directory name must be a full pathname beginning with
a single '/'.
If there are no such directories, \fBPROD_DIRS\fR must be null, i.e.,
\fBPROD_DIRS\fR="".
.TP
.B SSIT_DELIV_TOOL_DIR
This is the full pathname of the directory where the \fIship.rel\fR file
resides.
It is expected to be the directory that contains the delivery tools provided
by SSIT, e.g., \fINCAprep\fR, \fInotify\fR, etc.
The value of \fISSIT_DELIV_TOOL_DIR\fR must always be defined.
.TP
.B UNIFDEF
The utility (with desired options specified) that unifdefs source files,
particularly header files.
If no files are unifdefed (as determined by the contents of $\fBDESC_FILE\fR),
the \fBUNIFDEF\fR definition is unimportant.
.P
.SS Options
.TP
.I source_file_prefix
When provided, this argument is used to prefix each source (local) file in
the descriptions file, $\fBDESC_FILE\fR, to determine where it
actually resides.
For example, if \fIsource_file_prefix\fR is set to "/nfs/working" and a line
in $\fBDESC_FILE\fR looks like
.sp
.I "	bin/source_file     /bin/delivered_file"
.sp
the file \fI/nfs/working/bin/source_file\fR contains the local bits.
See the \fBFILES\fR section for information on the contents of the
descriptions file.
.br
.ne 6V
.SH WARNINGS
\fIMakedd\fR is not robust.
If you make errors in your descriptions file (like having unpaired lines,
maybe the result of a comment line not preceded by '#'), \fImakedd\fR will not
detect this specifically, though errors are likely to occur as a consequence.
However, once you get the descriptions file put together correctly, \fImakedd\fR
provides you a turn-key process for creating the directory structure for
delivering bits.
.SH AUTHOR
Dave Erickson, CND
.SH FILES
/tmp/SSIT*.*                     \fImakedd\fR work files
.br
$DESC_FILE                       file descriptions file
.br
$SSIT_DELIV_TOOL_DIR/ship.rel    the basic ship.rel file
.P
Generally, the descriptions file consists of 2 lines for each file you will
deliver to SSIT.
In addition, the descriptions file may contain blank lines and lines whose
first character is a '#'.
This allows you to place comments in the descriptions file.
.P
Line 1 of each pair of lines in the descriptions file contains:
.RS
.TP
\ 
<optional whitespace>
.TP
(1)
The local bits pathname: the file that contains the executable code, man page,
etc. that will be delivered.
This should be either a full pathname or a pathname relative to
\fImakedd\fR's optional \fIsource_file_prefix\fR argument.
If you do not specify the \fIsource_file_prefix\fR argument, the local bits
pathname should begin with a '/', or you must \fIcd\fR to the directory in
which the files are rooted before running \fImakedd\fR.
If you specify the \fIsource_file_prefix\fR argument, the local bits
pathname may begin with a '/'.
.TP
\ 
<whitespace>
.TP
(2)
The full pathname of where the bits will be installed on a customer's system.
Note that any file that should NOT automatically overwrite an existing file,
e.g., \fI/etc/passwd\fR, should be installed in \fI/etc/newconfig\fR/<file>.
The \fIcustomize\fR shell script for that file's fileset should determine whether
the file should be copied from \fI/etc/newconfig\fR to its proper place.
.TP
\ 
<whitespace>
.TP
(3)
\fBThis field is optional\fR.
If it is present, it needs only to be non-blank.
When present, field 3 indicates that the local bits (field 1) are to be
copied directly to the file specified in field 2.
This field is best used for the \fIupdate_info\fR file that is delivered to
SSIT but is not installed directly on a user's system (see the example
below for this use of field 3).
If field 3 is present, line 1 should exist by itself, i.e., it should not
be paired with another line.
.sp
It is recognized that the optional field 3 is a bit kludgey, but it allows
you to automatically handle files that are \fBnot\fR actually delivered
to customers but \fBare\fR delivered to SSIT.
Using this option, you may reduce the amount of manual work that must be
done to complete the process of constructing the delivery directories.
.RE
.P
Line 2 must be present when field 3 of line 1 is blank.
It must not be present when field 3 of line 1 is non-blank.
Blank lines and comment lines cannot be placed between lines 1 and 2.
Line 2 contains:
.RS
.TP
\ 
<optional whitespace>
.TP
(1)
The permission bits (expressed in octal) of the file as it is to be
installed on a customer's system.
For example, you might specify a value like \fI544\fR (-r-xr--r--).
.TP
\ 
<whitespace>
.TP
(2)
The owner of the file as it is to be installed on a customer's system.
For example, you might specify an owner like \fIroot\fR.
.TP
\ 
<whitespace>
.TP
(3)
The group of the file as it is to be installed on a customer's system.
For example, you might specify a group like \fIother\fR.
.TP
\ 
<whitespace>
.TP
(4)
The name of the product in which the file is contained.
For example, you might specify a name like \fI50969\fR.
See \fIThe SSIT Delivery Process Document\fR for limitations on
product names.
Your descriptions file may contain any number of different product names.
.TP
\ 
<whitespace>
.TP
(5)
The name of the fileset in which the file is contained.
For example, you might specify a name like \fINFS_CMDS\fR.
See \fIThe SSIT Delivery Process Document\fR for limitations on
fileset names.
Your descriptions file may contain any number of different fileset names.
.TP
\ 
<whitespace>
.TP
(6)
Use the character 'y' or 'Y' if the local file is to be run through the
\fIman\fR(1) command's formatting steps (before storing it in the SSIT
directory structure), otherwise use a different character, like 'n' or 'N'.
.TP
\ 
<whitespace>
.TP
(7)
Use the character 'y' or 'Y' if the local file is to be compressed using
\fIcompress\fR(1) (before storing it in the SSIT directory structure),
otherwise use a different character, like 'n' or 'N'.
Compression will be done after formatting, if \fIman\fR(1) formatting
is to be done as specified by field 6.
.TP
\ 
<whitespace>
.TP
(8)
Use the character 'y' or 'Y' if the local file is to be stripped using
\fIstrip\fR(1) (before storing it in the SSIT directory structure),
otherwise use a different character, like 'n' or 'N'.
.TP
\ 
<whitespace>
.TP
(9)
Use the character 'y' or 'Y' if the local file is to be unifdefed using the
tool named by the UNIFDEF variable of \fImakedd\fR (this is done before
storing the file in the SSIT directory structure), otherwise use a different
character, like 'n' or 'N'.
.RE
.bp
Following is an example descriptions file.
.sp
.nf
#  50969 is the product number given to NFS on a system 300.
#
#  The 50969 product contains the following filesets:
#
#       NFS_CMDS - commands and kernel segment
#       NFS_INCL - include files
#       NFS_MAN  - unformatted manuals
#       NFS_MANC - formatted manuals
#
#    1st line of a pair:                             C
#                                                    o     U
#        Local                Installed           F  m     n
#        Filename             Filename            o  p  S  i
#                                                 r  r  t  f
#    2nd line of a pair:                          m  e  r  d
#                                                 a  s  i  e
#  Perm  Owner  Group  Product  Fileset           t  s  p  f

cmds/bin/domainname           /bin/domainname
   555   root   other  50969    NFS_CMDS          n  n  y  n
include/nfs/nfs.h             /usr/include/nfs/nfs.h
   444   root   other  50969    NFS_INCL          n  n  n  y
man/man1/rusers.1             /usr/man/cat1.Z/rusers.1
   444   root   other  50969    NFS_MANC          y  y  n  n
man/man1/ypwhich.1            /usr/man/man1.Z/ypwhich.1
   444   root   other  50969    NFS_MAN           n  y  n  n

system/s300/update_info       /products/50969/update_info  *

system/NFS_CMDS/customize     /system/NFS_CMDS/customize
   544   root   other  50969    NFS_CMDS          n  n  n  n
system/NFS_CMDS/CDFcustomize  /system/NFS_CMDS/CDFcustomize
   544   root   other  50969    NFS_CMDS          n  n  n  n
system/NFS_MAN/customize      /system/NFS_MAN/customize
   544   root   other  50969    NFS_MAN           n  n  n  n
system/NFS_MANC/customize     /system/NFS_MANC/customize
   544   root   other  50969    NFS_MANC          n  n  n  n
.fi
.bp
As you can see, each of these files is part of the \fI50969\fR product.
Each file is owned by \fIroot\fR and is in group \fIother\fR.
Each file is placed into 1 of 4 filesets, and it is treated in
different ways: formatted, compressed, stripped and/or unifdefed.
Files that have none of these things done to them, e.g.,
the \fIcustomize\fR scripts, are just copied.
.P
The \fIupdate_info\fR line has a 3rd non-blank field, so the file is just
copied into place in the file specified by field 2.
Note that the \fIupdate_info\fR line is not paired with another non-blank
line, since its 3rd field \fIis\fR non-blank.
.P
See that each of the local filenames do not begin with a slash.
For \fImakedd\fR to work successfully with this descriptions file, you would
either have to specify the \fIsource_file_prefix\fR argument or \fIcd\fR to
the directory in which the files are rooted before running \fImakedd\fR.
.SH SEE ALSO
The SSIT Delivery Process Document
